---
title: Digital Literacy Narrative 24
permalink: /dln/
author_profile: false
---

## Digital humanities: a multidisciplinary intersection

As a 19-year-old sophomore at NYU Abu Dhabi, I embarked on a transformative journey by participating in the introductory course in digital humanities. The most important trait of our class, in addition to having a all-rounding curriculum, was having an incredibly diverse group of students that each provided their own insights and opinions each brought a unique set of strategies and skills into the classroom. Our majors spanned a wide spectrum of disciplines, including Computer Science, Interactive Media, Film and New Media, Business and Marketing, Literature, and Creative Writing. As a group, we collaborated and supported each other in the areas that we do not excel at. Together, with our combined capacities, we explored digital literacy, digital tools applied in the arts and humanities and data visualization. 

### _The Tools_
As avid social media user and technology enjoyers, we have already developed our own strategies for navigating the digital landscape in both daily life and academics. As a Computer Science major, I am well-versed in coding languages such as Python, Javascript, C++ and HTML, using them for software development, web-design and user experience. Once, I thought that my knowledge would not be especially useful in the humanities world, yet by using tools such as [posit.cloud] (https://posit.cloud), I am able to utilize my coding abilities in the context of data science and analysis. Although my academic journey is marked by problem-solving, algorithm design, and collaborative coding through platforms like [GitHub](https://github.com/), it does not mean I am limited to the world of software. Similarly, my peers from Interactive Media, Film and New Media, Business and Marketing, Literature, and Creative Writing had their own digital toolkits which they applied in their respective majors. Interactive Media students excelled in user-centered design and interactive storytelling, often utilizing software like Adobe Creative Suite. Film and New Media enthusiasts delved into multimedia production and digital narrative creation by utilizing tools such as generative AI for scriptmaking and brainstorming. Literature majors leveraged data analysis software for textual research and analysis, while Business and Marketing students honed their skills in data analytics platforms for market insights and financial analysis. Students in Literature and Creative Writing dived deep into research databases to fuel their literary and artistic pursuits. In this class, every single student provided a different view on which tools to utilize in every situation and how to apply them in their very own way. The richness of this course extended beyond individual tool proficiency, as it encourages a dialogue between seemingly disparate fields. A student skilled in computer programming might find common ground with a peer from literature when discussing text mining techniques. Similarly, a film student's expertise in visual storytelling could enhance a computer scientist's understanding of user interface design. This intersection of ideas not only enriches our learning but also fosters a culture of mutual respect and intellectual curiosity.

By providing knowledge on various tools related to data science, data visualization and management, this course highlighted the intersection of our diverse disciplines in the digital age. For example, by combining tools such as [Kepler](https://kepler.gl/) for data mapping and [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/) for dataset obtention, the data and the way we portray it shift to an absolutely different level. Content creation, once thought to be confined to specific fields, took on a multidisciplinary dimension. We explored creating interactive websites, digital art installations, immersive narratives, and AI-generated content. Our collaborative efforts showcased the power of interdisciplinary collaboration, blurring the lines between art, science, and storytelling.

### _Flow and Control of Data_
In the current society, social interaction and collaboration are vital components to both our daily lives and our professional career. Platforms such as [Slack](https://www.slack.com), [Discord](https://www.discord.com), and [online forums](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_forum) are hubs for exchanging ideas, sparking discussions, and collaborating on projects. Thanks to the existence of these platforms and the vast experience many of us have in the world of virtual social interaction, we find ourselves engaging in thought-provoking conversations that span our areas of expertise, enriching our perspectives and generating innovative ideas. 

Especially in the world of digital humanities, research data management and manipulation prove to be useful, almost necessary skills one should have. We delved into text analysis, data visualization, and digital archives. Tools like [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) and [Omeka](https://omeka.org/) are invaluable for organizing, annotating, and sharing research materials. The importance of data literacy transcends individual majors, equipping us to navigate the data-driven landscape of the digital age. 

Our critical reflection on our current abilities leads us to appreciate the concept of "[computational thinking](https://drive.google.com/file/d/10JKeKr9x79qBj8Bd6ND9wbOlOCFRSqNb/view)” in the age of AI. By utilizing this type of critical approach and making the most out of state-of-the-art AI technology, we were able to produce tools and content that will prove to be vastly more useful in the current society, considering the digital tools we utilze every day. Generating digital content means that honing our skills in data analysis, algorithm understanding, and result interpretation are universally valuable regardless of our major. As AI continues to shape our world, these skills will definitely empower us to harness its potential for innovation and informed decision-making.

### _Limitations and Responsabilities_

As with all technologies, it was crucial for us to understand the weaknesess and characteristics of the tools we were using. This included, of course, responsible use of our means. An example of this would be the current discourse regarding the [use of AI in the fields of Arts and Humanities](https://theconversation.com/how-ai-is-hijacking-art-history-170691). As much as we have learned the deep implications of our newly-found abilities, it was equally as important to learn how to use our technology for the greater good. For instance, by helping to [map](https://tasks.hotosm.org/) vulnables hotspots around the world that are not currrently availble in the maps online, we are contributing to the humanitarian help programs that work in the area. This should, in all cases, be our main objective: to provide, to contribute and to utilize our powers to push forward and achieve things that would otherwise be impossible without our help.

Once we are aware of our objectives, it was crucial to understand how far they can go and their limitations. The "[Golden Hammer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_the_instrument)" law, also called "Law of the Instrument" or "Maslow's hammer", is a cognitive bias that involves over-reliance on a familiar tool. This means, basically, that we tend to use tools that we are familiar with over ones that might be more suitable for the job. Of course we have learned all the good things about our technologies, but also, in what cases they fail. We worked with [Voyant Tools](https://voyant-tools.org/) and we were able to work with all the amazing capabilities, but also, we have learned that there are cases where it is lacking, such as forms of data that are not _only_ plain text.

### _Learnings_

Digital humanities has broadened our horizons, offering fresh perspectives on our respective fields of study. We began to contemplate the [ethical implications of AI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethics_of_artificial_intelligence) and data usage within our disciplines. In addition to this,  Computer Science majors questioned the ethical responsibilities of AI developers, while Literature and Creative Writing students considered the impact of AI-generated content on storytelling. Interactive Media students explored the possibilities of AI-generated art, and Business and Marketing students delved into AI-driven market analysis.

Furthermore, this course has inspired us to think critically about the role of digital humanities in shaping our social and cultural narratives. For instance, discussions around the ethical use of AI in creating and disseminating news highlight the need for journalistic integrity in the digital age. Our class has also explored how digital tools can be employed to preserve and promote cultural heritage, examining case studies of digital restoration of historical sites and artifacts. These explorations have not only deepened our understanding of our respective disciplines but also heightened our awareness of the broader societal implications of our work.

### _Objectives and Goals_

Looking ahead, I am excited to continue our exploration of new ways of thinking and working. We aim to cultivate a holistic approach to education that recognizes the value of interdisciplinary thinking in a digitally driven world. I envision a future where collaboration between the world of science, arts and humanities becomes the norm, fostering innovation and pushing the boundaries of our fields. Regardless of our major, every single student in the class aims to broaden their capacities and skills, all while looking into a future where knowledge about various tools for data visualization, classification and generation are crucial for every human field. Ranging from [data management and organization in spreadsheets](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00031305.2017.1375989), to representation of religious artworks such as [Sufi Art](https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/sufi/hd_sufi.htm), to even [visualization of spatial objects and mapping of data](https://www.jstor.org/stable/43773699), every person shall leave this class being able to have a basic idea on how to portray, classify and visualize most types of common information.  

### _Conclusion_

In conclusion, our journey through digital humanities will prove to be transformative. It expands our horizons, bridges the gap between technology and the humanities, and equips us with a multifaceted understanding of digital literacy. As we continue to navigate the digital landscape, we are poised to embrace new ways of thinking and working that promote interdisciplinary collaboration and responsible digital citizenship. In the age of AI, we are ready to embrace the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.

**READY FOR GRADING**